recent events in the u.s. arguably are a
direct result of decades or centuries
african-americans feeling oppressed in
numerous areas including career
opportunities health care economic
economics or politics to what extent
does the panel think that the UK suffers
from similar systemic racial issues and
what do you believe we can do to address
this of course only this is prompted by
the horrific death of George Floyd in in
Minneapolis David
well George Floyd looks like us could be
us but I think what's striking about
this moment is that when you look at the
protests it's black and white it's of
course many young people all kinds of
people saying enough is enough and his
last words were I can't breathe
people are saying not just in America
but also in this country of course that
none of us can breathe none of us can
breathe with this structural racism and
discrimination that's yes very deep in
America it's present also in our own
society David Cameron asked me to do a
review it's now four years ago on the
problems of an over representation of
black and Asians and minority ethnic
people in the criminal justice system
and it is the case that in our own
country you're nine times more likely to
be stopped and searched by the police
during this coronavirus 52 percent of
those who are getting fines are black
Asian or minority ethnic people over the
last well since 1990 a hundred and
eighty three black Asian of minority
ethnic people have died in police
custody so we have our own problems here
what can you do well the first thing is
all of us have to stop except expecting
black people to make the case for
structural racism educate yourself there
are some fantastic books out there by
Apple Hirsch
rania doe Lodge archaea and others who
have written about this subject educate
yourself say to your challenge your
friends your family of course on social
media people who are clearly racist it's
got to stop when you look at social
media it's full of it and I'll see it
again tonight after the end of this show
ask your politicians your Member of
Parliament your counsellor to do
something about racial racial profiling
get involved and if you must protest
and I applaud those who are actually
taken to the streets in our country did
did you take to the street since I
didn't take the streets because I'm you
know I'm a public servant I've got a
position of responsibility and I do
think that you can't on one week condemn
Dominic coming so travelling up the
culture than the next go out into put
into public but what I know cause a
social distancing is that I would say to
those who do go socially distance take
your sanitizer wear your mask
but yes protest make some noise and take
this all the way to November because we
know what Donald Trump is up to this is
deliberate the military the calling for
shooting his behavior he's winding up
parts of his base who want to see this
conflict between black and white in his
country because he thinks it might keep
him in office stand up to it so only let
me ask you I mean your questions is
about does the UK suffer from similar
systemic racial issues what's your view
what's your experience well I think
without question I think everyone would
know I think we've come from I think
we've come from a time or I'm talking
about going back in decades and
centuries where there were structural
implementations that were conscious that
disadvantaged term
you know that people and people of
people of color and then we've moved
forward into a situation whereby whereby
it's probably stubborn a stubborn
approach to okay yeah we know there's
something going on no not really
no I'm not really ready to do that yet
and then probably more in recent times
it's probably more like an apathy is a
spotlight on us not really
let's leave it for a bit but now the
spotlights on and it's it's but
obviously it's prevention is always
better than cure and you know here we
are in a situation where if prevention
had been implemented then we wouldn't
see the ugliness that we've seen in
terms of I mean that what I mean is in
terms of the protest and not calling
that ugly honest I'm calling that is
desperate and passionate you know these
these are all these things nobody wants
to see this you're talking about you
talking about the there been lots of
peaceful protests you're talking it
about those that where there has been
violence and where there has been
looting yeah
I was just good to us I mean Donna
looking at your career which is Stella
sparing your blushes but it's a stellar
career you must have broken through
quite a few glass ceilings to get where
you have do you still see systemic
issues of racism in the UK well as a
nurse you see it every day you see it
both in the structure that you're within
in the institution of health here at the
NHS institution if you look at how many
managers have broken through the grass
in black managers you'll see that
they're very few but I'm also as a nurse
we we face these issues on a daily basis
just look at the outcomes for our
patients you know every single measure
that you can apply that outcomes are
worse for black and minority ethnic
patients so whether it's diabetes
whether it's those that end up with
amputations the struck
of our society it is inherent the
structural racism is inherent and the
outcomes are poor for a number of people
that are of black Asian and minority
ethnic communities so it's personal to
me
in terms of my career yes you do have to
bash down some glass seems you do have
to circumvent some overtly racist people
but for me it's just look at the health
of our nation and that will tell you
about some of the structural
inequalities that we have and our Deen
is racism something you've had direct
experience so yeah I mean I think
ologies question I don't think anyone my
color or all his color or David or
Donna's color would say they happen it's
almost impossible I think when is any
example tell you when I first came to
this country my parents came as Kurdish
immigrants from Iraq you know first
thing people call me was a and I
try to explain I'm not Pakistani if
that's what they mean but I'm really
Kurdish you get ya bullied you get I saw
a horrific video on line of two white
kids asking a black kid to go down and
kiss their feet you get a sort of
behavior at school at the time but you
sort of try and survive it I'd like to
think things have changed and they have
in many ways but I think some of it's
been transformed to social media back to
David's point or mine or Donna you still
get casual racism everyday racism you
know he doesn't quite belong in
stratford-on-avon you know he's not from
here that sort of stuff well yeah it's
difficult for someone with the name
right as a Harley to claim that he's a
born-and-bred Stratfor daeun but
nevertheless I think things are getting
better there's lots of people speaking I
might I think my let me just say this
millions of people millions of people
have come out and said enough is enough
I can't breathe but also the equalities
Minister Kenny better knock said today
you the UK is one of the best countries
in the world so so I think there are
lots of great things that have happened
in our country that has allowed
people like myself like David like Donna
to do well in life but we can go even
further I think we can go much further
and I did this in the department
education when I was family's minister
working with the perm sector II because
the perm sector II there you know
basically didn't think that we were
trying hard enough because if you look
at the profile the civil service look at
the profile of parliamentarians so there
are very few people of my color or
David's color in the leadership roles in
those institutions back to Donna's point
even in the Health Service we need to do
better no point us just sort of saying
it's okay and that's fine we have to do
better now good thing which is really
have to just share this with your
audience my seven-year-old came up to me
right unprompted and said dad seven
years old Mia she's a dad black lives
matter and I just looked I said Mia
where did you get that from she goes dad
I got from tik-tok and and YouTube and I
said what does it mean Mia she said it
means that no one should be killed
because they're coming and so presumably
they're just picking up on what David
said Trump's comments for example about
when the looting starts the shooting
starts you condemn that I think any
comments that cause division is wrong i
retweeted that one in particular you
condemn that comment I condemn any
comment that comment at any other
comment that divide us george w bush
released the most beautiful statement
about how you bring people together you
bring the country together and i want to
think of all the millions of people okay
who will peacefully go out and
demonstrate well observing social
distancing and not the few agitators all
right let's hear from our right to be
let's hear from our audience there's
plenty of hands a a flora i am i just
want to say that you're talking about
how you want to address the racism
within this country but the problem is
is that if we don't start speaking out
if the government doesn't start speaking
out and condemning what's going on in
america right now then we are being
bystanders we're watching this happen
and we're not trying to stop it and i
think it's all well and good leaving the
responsibility to the public to be
protesting at a time when we should be
social distancing but because the
government is doing nothing they are
complicit
in the actions that the public is having
to take to show our support for America
because no one in the government is
doing that a Ben first of all um wanted
to thank mr. Lamie for the work that
he's done on educating non black people
for years on this issue before now but I
also wanted to address mr. Sahara in
asking him what his government is doing
to improve the curriculum in schools
because I think a huge amount of the
problem here comes from lack of
education about black history in the UK
because it's all well and good us
looking at the United States now from a
distance and saying this isn't our
problem but we have a huge long history
in the UK from slavery at our ports to
Windrush the McPherson report and then
Diana Baur becoming one of the first
black MPs in the country we don't learn
that and and now we have beli mijeong
who
it looks like the justice system has
given up on and it's because we don't
learn about these these these black
voices these black faces and we just
don't know what our own history is
Audrey hello yes um I just think it's
horrible what's happened but I wondered
whether bearing in mind all the positive
vibes we've had the clapping every
Thursday we know that a lot of the
people and I'm sure Donna will agree
with me who looked after us come from
ethnic minorities
should be not be harnessing that power
and doing something with it right now
rather than allowing it to disappear and
I just wondered whether any of the
politicians had ideas how we could do
this okay well let me cut before I come
back to the panel Hugh Pennington I
wanted to come to you just on the on the
original question to what extent does
the panel think the UK suffers from
systemic racial issues similar to those
in the states and what can be done about
it now you you were marching after the
death of Martin Luther King
so you you've you've you've seen this
over many years that's right I'm really
rather pessimistic you know I lived in
the US at that time and you know there
were terrible things happening and I
went to Chicago and the National Guard
was out on the streets you know
everything seems to repeat itself I
think an important thing that we must do
and I agree with the with the audience
member who's talking about history the
u.s. has this terrible legacy of slavery
and we have a legacy from the Empire and
clearly these are very important
historical things which still have a big
effect and if we learn more about the
anything you know if children learn
about them at school and learn about
what happened and learn about what
should be done to correct any kind of
problems that persist and we know that
many problems do persists you know my
pessimism will stay I hope I'm going to
be more optimistic than that and after
all you know I think you I sent elected
a black president but but we it's
working progress it's working progress
but it's working progress we must put
all our shoulder behind to make sure
that things do improve
[Music]